Greetings... citizens?

On March 14th 2014, I officially backed star citizen as a "wide eyed 13 year old" child. I dreamt of flying around spaceships in the best video game anyone had ever described to me. Today marks 10 years since that day and a lot has changed. I wanted to write a bit about my perspective on this game as I decided to check back in on it a few weeks ago since I realized how long it had been.

I first found out about the game the year prior, 2013, when the hangar module released and I saw YouTube videos of this game recommended to me while watching Minecraft. I was obsessed with Minecraft, but I imagined Star Citizen as the ultimate open world game. The graphics were realistic, it would simulate not just the world like minecraft but the people in the world too. A whole star wars like universe to play in. I was immediately hooked imagining myself Jango Fett style from the Gamecube game Bounty Hunter I would play, except I could actually fly the spaceships, and the bounty missions would never run out as the universe would continue to simulate more bounties for me to bring in. 

Of course I didn't have a PC. We had a family laptop that I could use occasionally for school work, or addicting games, but gaming PCs were hardcore expensive things that older gamers had. We had an Xbox and a Gamecube. But I wasn't about to let that stop me from experiencing the best space game ever. I researched everything there was about PC gaming, and looked into how to build your own PC and all the different components and stuff you need. I had saved up some money throughout childhood since one of my parents was a public university professor. It wasn't enough for a full PC, but being Jewish I had my Bar Mitzvah coming up and I knew I would get money from that. Between that and some lawn mowing / shoveling I made my custom PC a reality. And I had to do it ASAP because there would only be 500,000 spots for people in the alpha testing Yea I remember that shit, I refreshed it every day because I didn't want spots to run out before I could finish my PC, and I couldn't justify to my parents, even though it was my money, it was their credit card and I would pay them back and buying a game I didn't have the system for was a bridge too far. They were already hesitant enough to let me buy what I described as a pre-order.

After all that I only could justify the base package, an aurora ln. Throughout 2014 I consumed every piece of star citizen content I could. I was hyped in the way that only a child could be hyped. The release of arena commander this year was exciting, but there wasn't really much there for me to dig into, especially since I just had an aurora. I felt like 2015 was gonna be the year. As 2015 drug on with little progress in sight, I had started to become a bit frustrated with the project and I had spent most of 2014 and 2015 playing other games, and had even learned to code and mod some as I got into Skyrim and the other elder scrolls games. I also learned about Elite: Dangerous, and it had released, it was a space game I could actually play. And play it I did. But, I couldn't get out and walk around my ship. I couldn't board other ships and take the bounties hostage, I just blow up their ship and get paid. I played a lot of Elite, but I was still waiting for Star Citizen.

At the end of 2015 with the release of 2.0, I was ecstatic. I knew that SQ 42 would release next year and I could see the potential. I had figured out how to buy pre paid credit cards so I wouldn't have to justify the credit card expense to my parents on fake ships and bought a freelancer. When I played 2.X going around Crusader looking out the back of my Freelancer while flying around space, I knew this game was going to be amazing.

As 2016 drew to a close, however, I had become frustrated. Near the end I started to play a lot less as it had gotten stale and I could only imagine the great game it would once be for so long before I started to get frustrated again at how slow the progress had felt and the 3.0 delays. But I was confident that when 3.0 did release I would stop playing other games mostly as then Star Citizen will really start to take shape. I even upgraded to a Constellation Taurus at the November sale whatever they used to call it this year.

And boy oh boy was I wrong. 3.0 was delayed throughout all of 2017 and that was when I had really become disillusioned with the project. I felt scammed and betrayed, but I was still holding onto hope. I decided it would be best to just take a break until 3.0 was released sometime into this year. I remember talking with an org mate who thought beta wouldn't happen until 2020 at the earliest and I remember thinking that well even I'm not that pessimistic...

When 3.0 did release at the end of that year, I was so excited to hear about it... and then I saw the videos. It was a mess. I hopped on for myself and it was even worse. My PC couldn't handle the new planets really, and even if it could, the servers were imploding so often that I wouldn't even want to play. It was at this point I talked to some real life friends / family who had not heard of SC before and I realized that I had been scammed. I felt stupid, but I also recognized that I was a child, and it was unfair to beat myself over this. I harbor no hate towards CR, to hate others you must hate yourself, but he will forever be to me the man that taught me the valuable life lesson that there are people who will lie to you to take advantage of you, even if you're a child. It's not a fun lesson, but it's a lesson I'm glad I learned sooner rather than later. So that would put the beginning of 2018 as the last time I really booted up star citizen. 

I had invested so much of my childhood time into this project, however, that I was still curious at its progress, but I no longer believed the game would ever be one I wanted to play. I would download the game maybe once a year or so around the holidays and check it out, and it never really felt much better. There would always be something new, but it was never something I wanted. Hey you spawn in some weird location now at night with no reasonable directions of how to get to your ship, guess you should google how to navigate orison because you just remembered the crusader systems and chose that thinking it'd be like Olisar. I never ended up playing for more than an hour or two.

To really drive home the point, I had started backing this project when I was in middle school and I was now off to college. I hardly played SC at all throughout college because I was busy learning Comp Sci, you might remember how building my PC got me into coding, the best thing to come out of this nightmare of a "game". So don't give me "you just don't understand how development works" cause I do now. And let me tell you, the more I learned about it the more I realized how scammed I got, because I realized how insane some of the promises CR made were from a technical perspective. The AI and server sizes are the stand outs for me. I went several years without playing the game at all, maybe the occasional video to check in on what it was doing. 

Anyways I graduated college and went into software dev, and I booted up the game again with some free time I had realizing it was about to be 10 years, and for the first time since 2016, I actually had fun in the game. I did the bounty hunting missions, which I had done before, and the ships are still beautiful to look at and messing around flying was usually fun enough to give me a couple play sessions, but then the low mission payout and grind to get even enough for a medium size ship would usually spell the end of my play time. I had done this exact same gameplay loop in Elite a million times before with more deep and compelling ship loadouts in 2015. This time, however, I heard that the bounties drop cargo. I with ERT bounties they can actually drop some really valuable cargo. While it's a bit more pirate-y than my initial dream, it is not too far off from find bounty > board ship > stun gun > put in box > bring back to planet > profit. All that was missing was the part where I have to