## *Authors Note:*
#### *What is the narrative explanation?*
*This may seem strange at first, "why does my opponent get to choose how I attack them?", but it actually helps increase the verisimilitude and engagement in combat once applied properly.*

*Suppose there is a PC fighting with a zombie. They propose a maneuver to wrap a towel around the zombies mouth preventing it from biting unless they beat their attack [Check](Check.md) with a [Strength](../Player%20Characters/Chosen%20Statistics/Strength.md) [Check](Check.md) to rip off the towel. This leaves the zombie unable to attack, which is quite strong. The thief only rolled 3 damage on their attack and so the GM thinks, 'the zombie is going do everything it can to avoid this, so that's not happening' and says "it just takes the 3 damage." But the GM can narrate it as such. "You lunge at the zombie with your towel trying to smother it, but it lunges back at you. You manage to avoid it's decaying jaws and get in a quick slash with your dagger, but you missed the opportunity to wrap it in your towel."* 

*This general structure of you try to do X and either you do X, or the creature reacts in some way and you settle for Y is ideal. It avoids the "null result" of failed maneuvers, something is always happening, just maybe not exactly what you wanted.*

*This method is known affectionately in the TTRPG space as the "you cut I choose" rule. In referebce to the popular method for sharing a piece of cake: one person decides where to cut, while the other chooses their slice first. Whoever decides how to cut the cake, (the maneuver or the damage) will get the worse of the two slices usually. This encourages self interested parties to be as fair as possible, because they know that if they cut one slice clearly bigger, then they will get the smaller slice.* 

*This method also removes the hassle of needing needlessly detailed rules for maneuvers as it leverages the existing rules for damage and allows us to balance combat capabilities virtually entirely around DPR and status effects, while still letting players express creativity in combat.* 

*For GMs: The GM should decide what the target would do rather than using meta knowledge about the PCs (unless the target also has that meta knowledge in which case it isn't meta, it's just knowledge). If you always use meta knowledge the PCs will rarely benefit from maneuvers assuming you are about as good at strategy as they are. Try to think what the target would choose. Don't play them stupid, but also don't choose take damage instead of a 'mediocre' maneuver because you know one of the PCs has a magic item that can 'combo' off that maneuver.*