# Check Notes

Something that bothers me in most versions of d20 fantasy games is that it is not uncommon for a supremely skilled character to fail a check that a novice succeeds. Take a DC 15 check to in Shadowdark. Say it is to successfully use some magic item. The 10th level wizard has a +4 INT. This is a 50% chance. A normal person would have a 25% chance. Those are both pretty bad odds, and there is a 12.5% chance that if they both try, the wizard would fail and the normal person succeeds. Maybe the GM could give out advantage / disadvantage, but in my opinion this wider disparity of skill can be built into the system without adding much complexity, and gives the players a bit more agency.

Now that being said, the flattened math of Shadowdark is something that I like a lot, which is why damage, spell level, and any sort of scaling that impacts the damage a player can do / take is typically their ability score halved (cap 5). For melee it's +6. Only a bit lower than Shadowdark's +7, but everyone gets access to it, and the increased choices represent power in themselves. Essentially what I've done is kept the flattened math for damage and HP, but un-flattened it for other things because it lets characters feel more unique when it comes to their skills. Personally, there is nothing that frustrates me more in RPGs than your high level PC failing the saving throw you supposedly specialized in because you have a +6 but it was a DC 15. This way, players can get big bonuses, up to a +13 without any magic. You only fail a DC 15 on a natural 1 once you max the ability, this is by design. So failing checks will feel less like bad luck and more like decision they made.

To the crowd that says, "checks should be a last resort for the players, ideally they describe their actions in such a way that the GM doesn't call for a check at all", I agree. This is for balancing the difference between characters. Skill disparity should be wide for things that require a lot of expertise. For unique scenarios that come up in game, the GM should just set a really high [DC](DC.md) if the players described their action in such a way that seems very difficult. The DCs are higher than Shadowdark's to accommodate for this. You can still make the 10th level Wizard only 50% to succeed that magic item check since they didn't describe to you how they intended to defeat the puzzle rune. Give that thing a DC 30 (nearly impossible) and they need to roll a 17. The difference in this system is that a commoner is only succeeding on a natural 20, assuming the GM even lets them try (which, generally, if you can only succeed on a natural 20, they shouldn't).

## A Breakdown of the Math vs. Shadowdark

The cap for attack checks is actually slightly lowered compared to Shadowdark. A level 10 elven archer fighter with +4 Dex who rolled only the average talent (increase melee attack roll bonus by 1) Will have a +4 from Dex, a +1 from Farsight, a +6 from weapon master, and a +5 from talents, for a total of +16 to hit. The max in this system however is only a +13. The fact that even on a "miss" you deal your damage modifier lessens the need for bigger bonuses to hit to have the same expected damage output. We are giving all characters access to this, so we nerf it a bit. PCs can start with at most a +6 to their checks, slightly lower than the Shadowdark maximum of +7, but again, you have more control, which is in itself power, and you are more effective on a "miss" so the bonus can be a little lower. You can deal a maximum of +2 melee damage, the same as Shadowdark for a Half-Orc, we've just bundled their ability into the strength stat. You can deal a maximum of +1 ranged damage, same as a fighter who specialized with a longbow. The longbow is worse in this system, because I generally think people tend to undervalue how good ranged attacks are. Dexterity doesn't add to your AC because it adds to movement. You avoid getting hit by moving out of an enemies range, not by them missing their sword attack. The ability to do equivalent damage to the longsword with a longbow in Shadowdark makes me feel like it is clearly better to be an archer than a melee. d12 is +2 damage in expectation, but this requires I decrease my AC by 2, making it even more likely I get hit, compared to the archer not getting hit because they're too far away is + infinity turns alive. As I always say in games with a melee / ranged paradigm "ranged is cheats". So we nerf the longbow a bit to bring this in line. This nerf can be more or less undone at later levels because ranged weapons can benefit from +1 ammo *and* +1 weaponry, so they double scale compared to melee weapons.
