Greetings... citizens?

LONG POST - A Child Citizen's 10 Year Retrospective

On March 4th 2014, I officially backed star citizen as a "wide eyed 13 year old" child. I dreamt of flying around spaceships in the best video game anyone had ever described to me. That means it has now been more than 10 years since that day and a lot has changed. I wanted to write a bit about my perspective on this game as I decided to check back in on it on that day after a long hiatus when I realized it was my 10 year anniversary.

I first found out about the game the year prior, 2013, when the hangar module released and I saw YouTube videos of this game recommended to me while watching Minecraft. I was obsessed with Minecraft, but I imagined Star Citizen as the ultimate open world game. The graphics were realistic, it would simulate not just the world like minecraft but the people in the world too. Plus it was basically star wars. A whole star wars like universe to play in. I was immediately hooked imagining myself Jango Fett style from the Gamecube game Bounty Hunter I would play, except I could actually fly the spaceships, and the bounty missions would never run out, the game would never end, as the universe would continue to simulate more bounties for me to bring in. 

Of course I didn't have a PC. We had a family laptop that I could use occasionally for school work, or addictinggames.com, but gaming PCs were hardcore expensive things that only adult gamers had. We had an Xbox and a Gamecube. But I wasn't about to let that stop me from experiencing the best space game ever. I researched everything there was about PC gaming, and looked into how to build your own PC and all the different components and stuff you need. I had saved up some money throughout childhood. It wasn't enough for a full PC, but being Jewish I had my Bar Mitzvah coming up and I knew I would get gifts from that and could just ask for money instead. Between that and some lawn mowing / shoveling I made my custom PC a reality. And I had to do it ASAP because there would only be 500,000 spots for people in the alpha testing... yeah I remember that shit, I refreshed it every day because I didn't want spots to run out before I could finish my PC, and I couldn't justify to my parents, even though it was my money, it was their credit card and I would pay them back and buying a game I didn't have the system for was a bridge too far. They were already hesitant enough to let me buy what I described as a pre-order.

After all that I only could justify the base package, an aurora ln. Throughout 2014 I consumed every piece of star citizen content I could. I was hyped in the way that only a child could be hyped. The release of arena commander this year was exciting, but there wasn't really much there for me to dig into, especially since I just had an aurora. I felt like 2015 was gonna be the year. As 2015 drug on with little progress in sight, I had started to become a bit frustrated with the project and I had spent most of 2014 and 2015 playing other games, and had even learned to code and mod some as I got into Skyrim and the other elder scrolls games. I also learned about Elite: Dangerous, and it had released, it was a space game I could actually play. And play it I did. But, I couldn't get out and walk around my ship. I couldn't board other ships and take the bounties hostage, I just blow up their ship and get paid. I played a lot of Elite, but I was still waiting for Star Citizen.

At the end of 2015 with the release of 2.0, I was ecstatic. I knew that SQ 42 would release next year and I could see the potential. I had figured out how to buy pre paid credit cards so I wouldn't have to justify the credit card expense to my parents on fake video game ships and bought a freelancer. When I played 2.1 going around Crusader looking out the back of my new Freelancer while flying around space, I knew this game was going to be amazing.

As 2016 drew to a close, however, I had become frustrated. I quickly started to play a lot less as it had gotten stale and I could only imagine the great game it would 'soon' be for so long before I started to get frustrated again at how slow the progress had felt and the 3.0 delays. But I was confident that when 3.0 did release I would stop playing other games mostly as then Star Citizen will really start to take shape. I even upgraded to a Constellation Taurus (with a CCU for the cutlass blue I could swap when that got released, my dream ship) at the November citizen con sale.

And boy oh boy was I wrong. 3.0 was delayed throughout all of 2017 and that was when I had really become disillusioned with the project. I felt scammed and betrayed, but I was still holding onto hope. I decided it would be best to just take a break until 3.0 was released sometime into this year. I remember talking with an org mate who thought beta wouldn't happen until 2020 at the earliest and I remember thinking that well even I'm not *that* pessimistic...

When 3.0 did release at the end of that year, I was so excited to hear about it... and then I saw the videos. It was a mess. I hopped on for myself and it was even worse. My PC couldn't handle the new planets really, and even if it could, the servers were imploding so often that I wouldn't even want to play. It was at this point I talked to some real life friends / family who had not heard of SC before and I realized that I had been scammed. I felt stupid, but I also recognized that I was a child, and it was unfair to beat myself up over this. I harbor no hate towards CR; to hate others you must first hate yourself. What I do feel about CR is he will forever be the man who taught me the valuable life lesson that there are people who will lie to you to take advantage of you, even if, especially if, you're a child. The strong do what they will and the weak suffer what they must. It's not a fun lesson, but it's a lesson I'm glad I learned sooner rather than later. So that would put the holidays of 2017-2018 as the last time I really booted up star citizen.

I had invested so much of my childhood time into this project, however, that I was still curious at its progress, but I no longer believed the game would ever be one I wanted to play. I would download the game maybe once a year or so if I remembered to check it out, and it never really felt much better. There would always be something new, but it was never something I wanted. Hey you spawn in some weird location now at night with no reasonable directions of how to get to your ship, guess you should google how to navigate orison because you just remembered the crusader systems and chose that one thinking it'd be like Olisar (RIP). Hey bed logging works, and cargo too! Actually bed logging is bugged and you're ship was eaten by the server. Something Elite figured out how to do right in 2013 (during it's alpha too). I never ended up 'playing' for more than a few hours.

To really drive home the point, I had started backing this project when I was in middle school and I was now off to college. I hardly played SC at all throughout college because I was busy learning Comp Sci, you might remember how building my PC got me into coding, the best thing to come out of this nightmare of a "game". So don't give me "you just don't understand how development works" cause I do now. And let me tell you, the more I learned about it the more I realized how scammed I got, because I realized how insane some of the promises CR made were from a technical perspective. The AI and server capability promises are the stand outs for me. I went several years without playing the game at all, maybe the occasional YouTube video to check in on "development".

Anyways I graduated college and went into software dev, and I booted up the game again since I realized it was 10 years since my initial pledge. And, for the first time since 2016, I actually had fun in the game. I did the bounty hunting missions, which I had done before when I tried 3.17, but the low mission payout relative to ship price meant a 10+ hour grind to get even enough for a medium size ship and mathing that out was the end of that check in. I had done this exact same gameplay loop in Elite a million times before with more deep and compelling ship loadouts circa 2015. Coolers and powerplants do nothing. Ship gun diversity is actually LESS than it was in 2.X because they don't want to focus on balancing? They have different names, but the stats are the same across all similar size / types now. I'm not sure what the reason exactly they give for this is and I honestly don't care anymore.

This time, however, I heard that the bounties drop cargo. And with ERT bounties they can actually drop some really valuable cargo. While it's a bit more pirate-y than my initial dream, it is not too far off from find bounty > board ship > shoot with stun gun > put in box > bring back to planet > profit. All that was missing was the part where I have to do some fps after disabling the ship and I am grabbing a box instead of a person. It is lacking a lot of the depth and emergent gameplay I had been marketed with a cargo / trading / mining system to spawn these bounties, but the gameplay itself was actually there, and in a reasonable amount of time I could actually progress and buy most of the ships I had looked at with longing as a kid (except the BMM -- RIP). I'm not gonna give this project another cent, and I still have no faith in the future, as there are plenty of game design decisions since 2.X that make me scratch my head and laugh (looking at you food / drink, metro system wait times, other things that just waste time). Regardless I was able to get a solid 2 weeks of genuine enjoyable gameplay, which is 2 more weeks than I thought I would get.

But I just don't feel at home in the game any more. 12 year old me could never have fathomed I wouldn't want to play because the game had a bad vibe, but that's the case. I feel that the circumstances around the game have created a lot of toxicity. There have been so many shady things done around this project, I won't even begin to list them, beyond the predatory MLM style tactics and lack of progress. If you know you know and I am not gonna rehash it here. As a result the community around the game can be really toxic, something that I think evolved throughout all the shit storms over the years. And I don't just mean people who support CIG, the whole vibe is off since the 2.X days imo, but maybe it was always there and I was just too much of a child to see it. Add in my own personal history with the project and I think that the game will just always have a stink around it for me.

I will say though the one thing that bothers me the most  is when I see other backers go to bat for CIG / CR. While I do not harbor any ill well towards them, to defend the actions they have taken is mind boggling to me. I think that because I was a child and have the perspective of telling my family about this and them assuring me I got duped helped me accept what happened here, but whenever I see another long time backer that defends CR / CIG it makes me sad. Especially because they were almost always a full grown adult. Don't put men like CR on a pedestal. He's not your best bud, he's a wealthy CEO who made his money by selling you an MLM 'game'. He has no problem lying to world for gain even if it means taking money from children who don't know any better. While I do not hate CR, I do pity him, for I believe to lie to others so well you must first lie to yourself, and what a pitiful life that is.

So looking at this all in retrospect, I am glad that Star Citizen happened. It was the thing that got me starting in coding and it taught me valuable life lessons. Obligatory timeline because I find it hilarious: Since I found out about Star Citizen I
- got Bar Mitzvah'd
- started high school
- finished high school
- went to college
- double majored, and graduated
- started a career in software
- and a bunch of other random life stuff that happens in those years

Meanwhile SQ 42 is still a YouTube video, the PU still doesn't have space bounty hunting as it was pitched (the prisoner pods in the avenger in **2013** were the main reason I backed in the first place), and the BMM (the first stretch goal I saw after finding the RSI website) is still a pipe dream.

If there's a moral to the story I think it's something like this. Chris your inner 'wide eyed 8 year old' oughta recognize it. "All his life has he looked away to the future, to the horizon. Never his mind on where he was! Hmm? **What he was doing**!" - Yoda