Well greetings citizens.  
  
Oh boy it’s been a long time since I said that. So before we get into the details of the video and my thoughts on the star citizen project, I want to share a bit about me. I think have a pretty interesting history with star citizen. I first found out about the game when I was a “wide eyed 12 year old” in 2013. I spent several months working towards building a gaming PC so I could play star citizen and ended up backing in 2014. I ended up stepping from the project at the end of 2017 beginning of 2018 shortly after 3.0 when my family helped me realized I had been deceived into spending more money than I really should have on this “game”. Recently was my 10 year anniversary of backing and I wanted to check out where the game was at. I think I am a pretty unique demographic amongst the community and might make another video about my history with the game, but I just wanted to make this one to share my thoughts on where the project is at 6 years later since my hiatus. I spent the last week or two catching myself up on where the project was at.  
  
I’m not caught up on how exactly the community reacts to this kind of stuff nowadays but circa 2018 I would’ve felt this was a necessary inclusion/ disclaimer to make it through to some of the faithful.  
  
#### Disclaimer  
Since I’ve stopped playing I’ve learned software development went to college for it and that’s my career now. I’ve done a lot of personal game design and table top game design. I’m not exactly Christ Robert’s hallowed be thy name, but I know enough about the car to tell you why it ain’t driving straight. The answer, despite what CIG might have sold me for years, is not really technological challenges the industry has never seen that only star citizen is brave enough to tackle. Most of star citizens issues could be solved with the tech as it exists in game right now, but this has not happened because the project management has failed to iteratively design large portions of the games fundamental systems.  
  
I‘ll break this down into 3 main pieces. Given how star citizen was pitched originally as a space sim. We have the space flight part. We have the first person part. And we have the persistence part. In each of those we have the most glaring design issues in my opinion that CIG has failed to address over the 10+ year development cycle. I will focus on failures not caused by the ever blamed technology, but because of plan old bad game design.  
  
## Space Flight  
This is still undergoing total reworks, the latest one is master modes due for next patch tn. The flight model in my opinion has degraded since 2.5, which had its own issues but was still better than this. The biggest sub issue here is that every ship right now is basically designed like a light fighter from a combat perspective. This comes from the mirroring of space flight to atmospheric flight which makes sense to extent, but space is in many ways more like ocean and thus the navy. I can make a ship as big as I want, it’ll still “float”. This means that like naval warships, my ships can be big, but fighter jets are always small. So as my naval ship gets bigger I should become less and less reliant on needing to get my nose on target to deal damage the way a fighter jet does. As long as the primary way ships deal damage requires getting their nose on the target, any somewhat realistic and satisfying flight model will be light fighter meta as speed is the most important factor in getting your nose on target. In order for this to ever change, the answer has been and will always be ways to do damage without needing your nose on target. Otherwise the fastest fighter with a good pilot will never struggle to take down the slower ships.  
  
Now there are a few ways you can solve this problem, none of which star citizen has ever implemented properly.  
  
### Combat  
  
For larger ships the ability to aim your guns at targets not in front of your nose is one way to defend yourself against faster ships. Remember the freelancer commercial when the gun went sideways, it’s intuitively understood but it seems but they didn’t understand what’s actually going on enough to design mechanics around it. If I cannot do something like this I will never be able to shoot down a light fighter in a larger ship. There are a few ways you could do this.  
  
#### Turrets  
Back in 2.5 I remember extensive conversation about how to make turrets work to solve this exact problem and they still have not figured it out. The projectile speed of turrets being low relative to ship speed combined with the relative size of the ships given the distance of combat engagement means that you **cannot** land shots on target reliably against skilled pilots in the fastest ships. With master modes they are attempting to solve this problem by slowing down ships, but in order for that to work fully you’d need to slow them to a crawl, the fastest ships are still able to dodge these shots reliably. You could also increase projectile velocity. Or you could add better aim assists to turrets. They are a lot of ways you can experienent to get the end result of turrets are a reliable way to deal damage but they have yet to design a system where that is the case. To put my own stake down, what always made more sense to me was to create guns with a simple trade off. They have much higher projectile velocity but do less damage. You can balance these guns so as a light fighter given the energy draw / dps I would never want to use these weapons compared to the slower projectile weapons that require more skill to use provided I am good, but as a turreted larger ship with plenty of power for weapons I have no problem making this trade off as my larger hard point size will make up for the dps penalty somewhat and hitting the target 50% of the time at 50% of the damage is a hell of a lot better than 1% of the time with 100% damage. This solution is entirely doable by tweaking existing systems they already have in place. Hell they could even use the assets from one of the laser repeaters that is useless as they are all the exact some some are just more expensive. This is a simple design to implement and test to evaluate the impact but the refuse to balance weapons or modules for years “until the flight model is nailed down” ignoring the fact that the two are inextricably connected and need to be balanced in parallel not sequential.  
  
#### Missiles  
Another option that larger ships should have to deal damage to faster ships should be missiles. Now you don’t want to turn any dogfight into a game of who gets missile lock first and so where previous iterations of SC had super strong missiles, they’ve since made missiles basically an afterthought. Any skilled pilot in a fast ship should never really get hit by a missile, either in master modes or live. I can understand this goal of wanting the guns to rule the dogfights and that’s fine by me. But again let’s take a minute and think about how we can solve this design issue without needing some massively complex missile targeting rework that has physics bugs and takes years to come online. Whats my solution? You guessed it again, customize missile modules. As missiles get larger, instead of just getting slower and doing more damage, there should be an option to equip missiles that do less damage, but are much faster and better at hitting their targets. Dogfighting ships wouldn’t have large enough hard points or modules to fit the missiles or required components for these, but larger ships ala the freelancer mis would. I’m not going to be beat a Gladius in a dogfight but my missiles are gonna cripple it first. Now maybe I’m just a weirdo but I really enjoyed when missiles were better in SC because combats became much more tactical rather than twitch skill. It was about missile rationing, distance and knowing when to bug out, decisions you had a bit more time to make but still under time pressure with easier to execute maneuvers. While you don’t have to implement this missile solution, we again need some way to solve the problem of large ships need to ways to deal damage without getting their nose on target.  
  
#### Super gimbals  
Another solution I can think of would be to up the gimballing capabilities on the pilot controlled weapons. Again ala the freelancer commercial, some way to have them gimbal with much higher degrees of freedom. Elite has this with its turret hard points and that’s a bit of the issue with this one is that it starts encroaching on the carved out turret space that ships already have. Despite numerous requests, they seem to be wholly against the idea of the pilot being able to control the turret guns in any way even if the gameplay for turrets as is does not work, they refuse to experiment with this design. Despite the numerous promised design changes have been broken over the years, this one seems like one Chris just can’t let go of to even put in a short test in. So as long as that is the case I don’t think super gimbals will ever happen but it would be a potential solution to the nose on target problem. But I don’t think it’s needed as long as you’re willing to look into either the turret or missile refactoring of components.  
  
#### Why I don’t think they will ever get it ’right’  
The fact that any solution beyond the complete rework of the flight model has never been explored means that I have close to zero faith that they will ever get this gameplay to a satisfying place as they seem to despise the balancing approach to fine tune a system and appear more interested in reworking things entirely until one day it magically works the first time. For anyone who thinks that, I don’t think *you* understand how game design works. Your first pass will have issues. Not just bugs like design and balance issue. That doesn’t mean you need to blow it up and start again. Balancing a system can go a long way. So the years of them refusing to balance until they build a new system (master modes) whose whole goal is that it should balance multi crew from the start is just insane. It won’t be perfect (and the pvp community has tested that multi crew still has the same issues!) and you’re back right where you started, deciding whether to balance the system you have and see if it is workable, or refusing to balance it because the next rework will totally be more balanced from the start and so any balancing we do now would be wasted effort. It’s a never ending loop that the game has been stuck in since 2015 and until they realize they’re in this loop they won’t get out of it.  
  
### Cargo  
Phew now that combat flight is out of the way let’s talk about the other major type of flight. Cargo. In my opinion this also includes mining, salvage, etc. This type of flight at its core involves acquiring and transporting resources. Whether you mine, trade, or salvage those resources, you will interact with the core loop of managing your cargo and transporting it.  
#### Loading up your ship  
The physical cargo is in my opinion pretty cool. I get the tractor beams are bit magic but that’s always been part of sci-fi and I like them. One of the main issues here is how janky the physics engine is. Now, unlike the balancing choices that they could have experimented with in combat requiring very simple weapon tweaks, physics engine development is genuinely super technically complex and famous for being hard to do. Now they really shot themselves in the foot with their choice of engine in the first place, but that’s a whole other can of worms, they’re here now and I assume scrapping the engine is not an option.  
  
Loading up ships is fun until it breaks horribly, with cargo boxes warping through ships pushing each other around, and potentially instant killing you. This is broken in the kind of way from my experience will never really be fixed as long as they use this engine. Bethesda games are famous for physics problems the engine had back in the early 2000s that persist still, that’s 20+ years of unsolved bugs, and those aren’t bugs that you can really fix with mods either. It’s just a really hard thing to fix unless you rebuild the engine and that’s a nightmare. So given that I don’t think this is realistically fixable, if I’m a designer my head should immediately go to how I can mitigate this occuring. Let me tell you, making players manually load / unload their cargo so this happens even more would not be on my list. Even if you still want that in the final release I’d put that shit firmly in the “game not ready yet” pile, the same pile a lot of other things should have gone in.  
  
This speaks a bit to the larger issue of time. I would expect most of my time spent in the space transport loop to be transporting around space. Instead a large portion of it is spent waiting for other random shit like future metro systems and running around a small zone in a city. It’s time sinks for a running around simulator.  
  
#### Space Transport  
I would expect in a space sim for the space flight to be the compelling part of the journey, and it’s basically non existent. The atmospheric flight is interesting, not as deep as real flight sims but it’s perfectly serviceable for me and I think most players. The space flight is literally just point and click. The only reason to not get out of your sit and go make food is the chance you get interdicted by another player. If that happens to you then you should buy a lottery ticket because with how that’s implemented I’m pretty sure you got better odds at the power ball. Even if it were more likely though, I’d still just sit at my computer and do something else while keeping an eye on the game because unless that happens there’s literally nothing for me to do. Quantum jumps around planetary systems is more fun because your plotting routes and consistently maneuvering your ship to your next route. It’s a bit buggy but overall I think it’s fine. And I’ll actually give them the benefit of the doubt for once and assume the new star map won’t be utter shit. Any interplanetary travel however is pretty shit gameplay. The quantum jump system was introduced when all we had was crusader and it was fine for that but pressing a button while my ship goes in a straight line and I do literally nothing for 5-30 min depending on your components / distance is the definition of a time sink. Maybe the ethereal jump points will finally add something to this. I think a good choice however without needing to develop a wholly new system would be to make more stuff doable from your mobi glass. So many things that I can do from my phone in real life require me to ride a subway somewhere in star citizen. Imagine if I could shop anywhere from my mobiglas when I am connected to a comm array and when I land the things I bought would be in that local inventory when I get there (or my hangar when / if that happens). I still have to fly to my hangar there to pick up my order but I don’t have to ride the god damn subway to outfit my super futuristic spaceship. This means that if I so desire I am spending time in space / in my ship / in my hangar in the god damn space game. Thats just one example but adding more tasks, coordinating refuels at stations to decrease the time it takes for larger ships, etc would give me stuff to do similar to the flight planning that you do in a flight sim and makes the quantum travel time not so empty. Again these are all things that require no fundamentally new systems, and could be implemented quickly if making fun game design decisions were something management prioritized.  
  
  
  
## Persistence  
Things persisting is important for any rpg like game to give the world a sense of consistency and progression. Star citizens design choices around persistence however are some of the most nonsensical things I have ever seen.  
### Ship Persistence  
Let’s start with my personal favorite. Ship persistence. I’ve heard several times now that the goal with persistence in star citizen is something like “I can set down a cup here come back a month later and it’ll still be there”. Ok cool. I don’t think that’s the coolest thing ever and probably would be better for performance if I had to use some sort of beacon box that costs an in game resource rather than people just being able to build medical gown forts, but as long as there are certain places like space ports that have “garbage collection” iykyk to make sure they don’t become unusable from this I can see the benefit of being able to do dead drops and similar cool things.  
  
Now however, why is it so important that the soda can stays there, but my player sitting in my ship cockpit upon logout / disconnect / crash is magically teleported back to the last place I landed. “Well you didn’t bed log!!!” I hear you say, “We need to have a mechanical reason to use beds, Chris PROMISED!!!”. If we’re gonna start listing shit that Chris promised we’re gonna be here a while alright buckaroo. We’re long past holding onto promises at this point. I’m here to critique design decisions not cling to stupid ideas. If the persistence of a cup on Yela is more important to you than not being teleported magically away and your ship being eaten by the void along with everything stored in it because “you forgot to sleep bro” then you’re delusional. If the game wants to be realistic with persistence, then I think that being able to log back in to where I logged out last, you know, my space ship in my space ship game being in the same state it was in when I left, you know something that Elite Dangerous figured out in **2013** in its first year of development, is more fucking important than your god damn coffee mug being on the same counter top.  
  
### Bed logging  
You can still add reasons to have a bed in a ship. I believe the plan was if you don’t bed log then your ship just will be there with you in it chillin while somebody could find and kill you in theory. Sure, fine whatever. Until you have that implemented, whoever thought not having a bed means the universe should magically teleport you and eat your ship is deranged. This is yet another case of you have the technology, just make all logouts bed logs until you’ve fully fleshed out ships being able to persist when you are not there. To those who might say, it’s just testing right now, a few things  
1. the games legally early access CIG ain’t refunding you anymore they’ve already delivered so it counts as a game 10+ years in my dude  
2. To effectively test a game design, you should strive implement mechanics that as closely mirror your final design goal as possible, iterating along the way to reach a final fleshed out system. The system of  
        1. “me logging out and my ship disappearing even though my ship doesn’t have a bed”  
        2. is so much closer to the stated design goal of  
        3. “me logging out and my ship doesn’t have bed so it sticks around and maybe someone will find me and decide to kill me even though space is unfathomably large but otherwise I should come back just like bed logging”  
        4. than the current design which is  
        5. “so I am magically teleported back to a station, implying the game assumes somebody would have definitely found and killed me even if I dc’d for like 1 minute, but my character is still alive so I didn’t die I just literally teleported and my ship was deleted”  
3. This current design is so far off from the stated goal that this is actually bad testing. You want to test the design of your game, so make the build as close to your intended design as possible, or your testing feedback will be less useful.  
4. It makes testing and playing the game so much more annoying. If a crash happens while I was in space with important stuff in my ship, I’m probably just done with game for a while. No more testing, no more feedback.  
  
This is honestly such a basic rpg feature that it baffles my mind how star citizen 10+ years in still doesn’t have it. It still feels like a lobby fps with me starting at spawn in a new session if I didn’t bed log. Imagine if in Elite Dangerous if you didn’t end your game by going into a ship menu and hitting “sleep” you were teleported to wherever you last landed and put into the starter ship, requiring an insurance claim to get your old ship again. It’s so nonsensical that when it gets touted as a really tough technical challenge as opposed to a baffling design choice it boils my blood. This basic level of “persistence” is called saved memory and computer games have had it since the 80s maybe even the 70s. Elite Dangerous shows yes you can indeed do this with space ships too they don’t magically break computers. The technical challenge here is trying to get the ships to stick around after you log out across servers. The teleporting you around and deleting your ship until we figure out how to implement this new technical feature because you didn’t sleep in a bed is a baffling design choice.  
  
  
  
## First person  
  
The first person component in and around ships is pretty solid. No big notes, it has been and I suspect will always be the strongest selling point of the game, just walking around the beautiful ships same as the hangar module all those years ago.  
  
The rest of the first person content has some… issues to say the least.  
  
### FPS Combat  
I honestly don’t want to even start on this one I’m still scarred from Star Marine. Can I just say play literally any other game with reasonable reviews for its fps combat and notice how it’s so much better than star citizen it’s not even funny?  
  
#### Physics  
The physics in the engine are buggy jank, caused issues for the cargo systems  
and causes issues because they insist on physic engine based reactions for your character despite how janky the physics engine is. You get knocked around unpredictably randomly fall prone, and it will never be fixed until the gargantuan task of perfectly simulating physics is achieved which is like I said earlier, not something a design team should count on being achieved in their lifetime. There are physics engines that have been worked on for 20+ years that still have janky exploits. Best case scenario in 5-10 years they have it to the point where it only breaks if you try to break it, and so pvp will be nightmare still but pve won’t be too bad similar to Bethesda with their engine. As a designer you need to recognize that at this point the physics just ain’t happening and think about how you can implement something that works well as a stand in. You can still work on the physics in the background as a “stretch goal” but to hold the gameplay hostage around a potentially impossible task is just bad prioritization.  
  
There are so many solutions to this that other realistic fps games have explored I don’t really care to get into them, but the fact that management has not realized the stupidity of their stubbornness yet here doesn’t really make me want to get into it.  
  
#### AI / NPCs  
If there’s one thing worse than the janky physics it’s the absolutely laughable AI. I honestly don’t know what kind of glue the team responsible for this is sniffing because there was more complex AI in 90s fps games. I think it’s just that the servers are so busy begging for the sweet release of 30k from the world itself that they have nothing left for the NPCs. I’m honestly not sure how to fix this one other than maybe have your team spend more time on figuring out performance efficient basic combat behaviors that players will actually see and less time on bartenders and idle walking animations that go ignored by almost everyone. Seriously I’d take signpost AIs at most landing zones if it means that the combat ai at least aims in my general direction consistently.  
  
### The Metro  
These are cool at first, but are just a huge time sink. As I discussed in my cargo section, so many of these things only done at cities should be doable from the mobi glass. They’d be doable from my phone in real life. Then I can just pick up the items when I land in the hangar from the local inventory or my hangar inventory if they ever get that implemented. I understand you spent all these time on the cities and want people to experience them, but forcing you to use it to shop is a terrible reason. It makes shopping feel like a chore instead of an exciting reward to spend your credits.  
  
The design decision to require you to physically go to every shop was a huge development endeavor and was completely unnecessary for the point the game was in with so many foundational systems not working / implemented. Buying from your mobi glass to deliver to local inventory / hangar makes so much more sense to me full stop or at least until the game was much further along, and they could have worked on the other bigger design issues I discussed. The fact that this is all there is to do in cities makes me confident they won’t change this because then you’ll realize how devoid of content the cities are. It’s just so confusing to me to spend so much time to build shopping districts when all you do in the shopping districts is open up a mobi glass screen to buy / sell your stuff. Give me a legitimate reason to go in the cities, more than just some mobi glas screens that can only be accessed inside the city.  
### Physicalized Inventory  
Overall this system is decent. It’s a bit janky at times and has some bugs but no real design issues, unless you count…  
### Survival  
#### Food and Drink  
Holy mother of god Chris what is your major malfunction. FailureToReport said it best, not everyone needs to slam down a big gulp and a burger at the same rate you and your brother do.  
  
If we’re still on the promises train, then I remember food and drink was gonna be optional. Well fucking got me I guess.  
  
I’m not sure what sick person finds needing to buy a bunch of random future food to put in storage so they can more frequently than they eat themselves shove it down there throat, but not before opening your inventory to take your helmet off because realism. Is this realism we’re going for Chris? Because nobody starves this quick. Is this gameplay? Because it’s not. The hardest part is the fact that there’s so many fake vending machines you have to wander around forever just to find a place you can actually buy food from.  
  
I just cannot fathom why this felt necessary, especially at this point in the game. My two cents, it’s the easy Minecraft mechanic to implement in a patch for the marketing. At the very least could we have an under suit that keeps us fed that we just need to restock? I understand the goal of wanting to need resources for long exploration trips and I like that but for just the average non explorer / survivalist flying around my fighter space ship I don’t wanna have to go to 7/11 for my big gulp every 2 hours lest I perish on the battlefield. Maybe logging out consumes food? So if you don’t have it then you die, your character eats while you’re not playing? Something, anything so that I don’t have to deal with this bullshit so often.  
  
  
  
#### Heat cold and oxygen  
Pretty good overall, except this ties into the problem with persistence, I can never log out mid expedition. If I dc my ship is gone and any gear or loot I stored there is gone with it. The issues here really highlight the fact that fundamental pieces not being close to your final goal really disrupt your testing of all other systems. Oxygen timers can create a similar issue to food / drink, until there are ways to bring along more o2 this shouldn’t be in game because you can’t balance the o2 system without those items.  
  
Overall I think my case is pretty solid. The biggest problem with star citizen isn’t the tech is lagging behind, it’s a serious of bad design decisions and mismanagement of not understanding how to iterate on a game over time to make the systems more enjoyable. A denial of reality of what isn’t working and a willingness to adjust and tweak things to make the system balance and function. Poor prioritization of features adding things that don’t make sense with other systems as they are implemented and break the coherency of the game in the name of “testing” not realizing that making the game function less like how you say it should is antithetical to effective design testing.  
  
The Star citizen seems to fundamentally not understand iterative design. There are aspects that have seen iterative design, but from the high level view of the project there is a  stubbornness against iterating on ideas that aren’t working or meshing together with the approach often being well once everything is online it’ll just work. Space combat is a great example of why that’s silly. Design a system is fluid, everything in it affects everything else. It’s a high variable system and the best way to go about improving it is to frequently change a variable or two at a time to try to tune towards your desired outcome. This idea of will just build it from the ground up again if it doesn’t work is why the project will drag on for decades. The cult of done by no boilerplate is a great discussion of how this mindset of perfection can ruin programmers and I think thats what been happening for the past 10+ years with star citizen.  
  
So citizens that concludes my ten year retrospective after a long hiatus. I wish you all good luck, but I can confidently say this return did not spark a renewal of faith in the project. I am glad the game is at least in a not entirely miserable state like it was for the beginning of my hiatus, it’s at least somewhat enjoyable now, but it’s still got so much stuff that there’s other things I’d rather be doing.  
  
Before I sign off, let me guess, well you should just wait for 3.23, it’s gonna be massive and fix xyz thing that you said was bad.  
  
Yup. You got me dude. Should’ve known. Good luck citizens, you’ll need it.  
  
That’s me signing off.